---
title: 'Possible Worlds'
date: 2020-01-01
permalink: /posts/2020/01
tags:
  - metaphysics
---

Is there good reason to believe possible worlds other than the actual one exist? In this essay, I will argue that although possible worlds are a useful tool for understanding modality, there is no good reason to believe that possible worlds other than the actual one exist as concrete entities.

## I. Modality and Possible Worlds

Logic and semantics are not all about categorical propositions, which depict things going on in the actual world. In our daily life, as well as in scientific and philosophical discussions, we make modal statements about non-existent events all the time. For instance, when we say a glass is fragile, we are not making a statement about its existing properties such as its color or shape; rather, we are making a postulation that it will break into pieces if dropped or hit. Likewise, when a glass is broken and we make a counterfactual statement that “if I had been more careful, the glass wouldn’t have been broken”, we are also not making a statement about what actually took place. In science, all dispositional properties of matter, such as “solubility”, “flammability”, and “tendency to decay”, are modal. And in philosophy, topics such as determinism, anti-realism, and supervenience can hardly be illustrated without appealing to modality.

To put it bluntly, modality can be regarded as ideas presented with modal quantifiers such as “necessarily” or “contingently”. “Trump is necessarily human”, “Trump was contingently the president of America”, “Necessarily, 2+2=4”, and “Contingently, the sun rises every day” are all statements put in the form of language which are true. Naturally, we say that Trump is necessarily human, because being human is his essence, and that he was contingently the president because history could have turned out otherwise—say, he did not run for the 2016 election, or that he quit due to some accident. Also, we say that “2+2=4” is necessarily true because it could not be otherwise; but “the sun rises every day” is only contingently true because we can think of a situation where the sun does not rise on some particular day. With the first two propositions, modal quantifiers are used to modify the object “Trump”, and with the latter two, quantifiers are used to modify the whole sentence. We refer to propositions resembling the former as *de re* modality, and ones resembling the latter as *de dicto* modality.

A fact can be true in *de re* modality, while false in the *de dicto* sense. Consider the two propositions constructed by Theodore Sider, or two propositions about emeralds:

(a, de dicto) Necessarily, the number of the planets is odd.  
(b, de re) The number of the planets is such that it is necessarily odd.  
(c, de dicto) Necessarily, emeralds are green.  
(d, de re) Emeralds are necessarily green.

While the *de re* instances are presumably true in the above cases, it is difficult to admit the *de dicto* statements to be true in both cases, for there can be a situation where the number of the planets is even and some emeralds are not green. Statements as such are very different from truths such as “1+1=3” and “No squares are round”.

Yet telling what is necessarily true and what is only contingently true in *de dicto* modality is very tricky. A traditional and most widely acknowledged way to make such a distinction is to appeal to possible worlds, which is a concept that originated with Leibniz. Leibniz’s biconditionals state that:

(i) A proposition is necessary iff it is true in all possible worlds.  
(ii) A proposition is possible iff it is true in some possible world.

From this perspective, we cannot accept (a) and (c) to be true, for there can be possible worlds where the number of the planets is even and some emeralds are red, blue, or yellow.

But what are possible worlds really? Philosophers’ explanations differ. Roughly, there are two parties: the concretist (or realist, as David Lewis referred to it in his book) party holding that possible worlds are as real as the actual world; and the abstractionist party presenting possible worlds as abstract entities. Interpreting possible worlds as real and concrete existence is indeed an ingenious invention and successfully dodged many problems posed to traditional theories. But like most philosophers, I hold the opinion that accepting the existence of concrete possible worlds causes greater trouble than advantages. The remaining part of this essay will be devoted first to clarifying Lewisian possible worlds and the reason to believe in them, and then discussing the trouble of believing in non-actual possible worlds.

## II. Lewisian Possible Worlds Theory and its Advantage

The concretist idea of possible worlds is best demonstrated and defended in David Lewis’s remarkable work *On the Plurality of Worlds*. Lewis held the opinion that there are infinitely many possible worlds which are as real as the actual world in which we are living. In Stalnaker’s paper *Possible Worlds*, published in 1976, he concluded Lewis’s hyper-realist description of possible worlds in four points:

(i) Possible worlds exist.  
Possible worlds do exist and they are as real as actual ones, even if they are not actual. This first statement is already peculiar enough, because when we are using modality in normal life—for instance, when we say that “the glass wouldn’t have broken if I had been more careful”, the situation which we have in mind is one that did not actually take place. In some terminology, we would regard it as ‘non-existent’. Lewis, nevertheless, grants the existence of such a situation.

(ii) Other possible worlds are things of the same sort as the actual world—“I and my surroundings”.  
Here, “surroundings” can be interpreted as things that are spatiotemporally related to me, and the actual world is the sum of all spatiotemporally related beings. In the same manner, other possible worlds are ones in which all things are real and spatiotemporally related. On the other hand, two spatiotemporally unrelated beings are in two different possible worlds.

(iii) The indexical analysis of the adjective “actual” is the correct analysis.  
Lewis argues that the actual world is different from other possible worlds only in the sense that it is the world where we reside. Beings in other possible worlds should consider the very world that they are in as actual, while ours as merely possible.

(iv) Possible worlds cannot be reduced to something more basic.  
The abstractionist philosophers usually adopt the opinion that possible worlds are collections of smaller entities. For example, linguistic ersatzists think possible worlds are sets of non-contradictory sentences and combinatorialists see possible worlds as sets of spacetime points. But Lewis argues that possible worlds cannot be reduced to any sort of units. It is not reducible, just like the actual world cannot be reduced to more fundamental units.

But the points listed above are not exhaustive. To explain Lewisian possible worlds more completely, we also need to add that:

(v) There are no trans-world identities, but only counterparts.  
In other words, in the Lewisian picture, possible worlds are absolutely isolated and individuals cannot travel from one world to another. When we are saying that “Trump could have lost the 2016 election”, what we refer to is neither Trump in the actual world, nor Trump himself in some possible world, but Trump’s counterpart in some possible world, who shares most characteristics with Trump, but differs from the actual Trump in a certain way.

The greatest strength of the concretist world theory is that it avoids the circularity most possibilia discussions confront. To be more specific, we introduce possible worlds in the first place to explain what is necessary in *de dicto* modality. Yet if we want to tell, in an abstractionist way, what has to be in possible worlds, the answer should be “what is necessarily true in the *de dicto* sense”. But concrete possible worlds seem to have resolved the problem. As possible worlds are real existences, what is in them is not to be explained by *de dicto* modality.

## III. Lewis’s Problems

Nevertheless, given that concrete world theories manage to avoid this circularity, the problems they face tend to offset their advantage. One very important obstacle for them is that it is impossible for us to know what is happening in possible worlds. For one thing, real possible worlds are isolated from one another. We can turn to nothing but our imagination to tell what possible worlds are like. But being conceivable is by no means a justification for proper knowledge about what really exists. If we do want to grant conceivability as the justification of what exists in a possible world, and say that things exist in some possible worlds as long as we can think of them, we will again trap ourselves in the circularity problem other world theories share. For another thing, the number of possible worlds is infinite according to Lewis’s explanation. And to ascertain a proposition as necessary, we need to exhaustively examine every possible world, which is a task implausible to complete.

Additionally, according to the second character of the Lewisian possible worlds, it is impossible for there to exist two spatiotemporally related worlds, for there is not a single possible world which contains two spatiotemporally unrelated worlds. One possible way to reply to this objection, as Phillip Bricker suggested in *Concrete Possible Worlds*, is to allow plural analysis of worlds. But such permission to analyze two possible worlds together would lead to greater confusion. If we allow two possible worlds to be analyzed together, we can consequently allow three or more, and eventually expand to all possible worlds. On top of that, it would be possible for Trump to have won the 2016 election, and also have lost the 2016 election, if these two events happen to take place in the two possible worlds in question.

A third problem of Lewisian worlds is that the theory fails to give a representation of impossible things in modality. Since something is impossible, there is no way for it to exist in any real world. As Lewis himself indicated, there is no such thing as an impossible world. Therefore, to represent the impossibility of a proposition, we need, again, to exhaustively examine every possible world.

These are not all the problems Lewisian possible worlds have, but they are ones most likely to overthrow the achievements concretists may achieve in analyzing modality. There are other objections less tightly related to modality, yet equally important. For instance, if what exists in possible worlds are merely our counterparts, then it appears that we have no reason to care about our counterparts’ wellbeing. But under normal circumstances, when we are using modality, we do care about what will possibly happen. Also, Lewisian possible worlds seem to say that fictional beings such as talking donkeys, dragons breathing fire, and golden mountains do exist, which is difficult to accept.

The conclusion is that we probably cannot avoid adopting a circular analysis after all. Probably what is true *de dicto* necessarily is *a priori*. Things like true logical and mathematical propositions are true in themselves, and the introduction of possible worlds can never justify such truth. What we can do at best is to use possible worlds to help us think more clearly and systematically. For this purpose, the abstractionist version of possible worlds, or “paradise on the cheap”, is enough. Believing in the existence of real possible worlds comes at too high a price.

## References

[1] Melia, J. *Modality*. Routledge, 2014.  
[2] Lewis, D. “On the Plurality of Worlds.” *Central Works of Philosophy, Volume 5: The Twentieth Century: Quine and After*, 2005, 5: 246.  
[3] Stalnaker, R. C. “Possible Worlds.” *Noûs*, 1976: 65–75.  
[4] Lycan, W. G. “Possible Worlds and Possibilia.” 1998.  
[5] Sider, T. “Reductive Theories of Modality.” *The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics*, 2003.  
[6] Mackie, P., and Jago, M. “Transworld Identity.” 2006.  
[7] Menzel, C. “Possible Worlds.” 2013.  
[8] Bricker, P. “Concrete Possible Worlds.” 2008.